USHIFT-2186: Multus CNI for MicroShift (#1545)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/microshift/multus-cni-for-microshift.md

* As an MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interface to certain Pods so that I can
  start slowly migrating existing solution to MicroShift.

### Goals

- Provide optional Multus CNI for MicroShift clusters that can be added to existing clusters

### Non-Goals

- Automatically removing Multus from the cluster upon RPM uninstall

## Proposal

Deliver Multus for MicroShift as an optional RPM containing required manifests that will be applied
during MicroShift's start. There should be little to none changes to MicroShift itself as we want
Multus CNI for MicroShift to fit optional components pattern.

### Workflow Description

**User** is a human user responsible for setting up and managing Edge Devices.
**Application** is user's workload that intends to use additional interfaces.

1. User gathers all information about the networking environment of the edge device.
1. User prepares NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NAD) CRs that will allow Application to be part of the specified network.
1. User prepares ostree commit that contains:
   - (optional) Init procedures to configure OS for usage of the additional network
   - MicroShift RPMs
   - Multus for MicroShift RPM

>    - Application with the NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs.

Author: These are just contents of the ostree commit - listing what's expected to make use of the Multus. Why should we clarify order here?

>    - Application with the NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs.

Reviewer: The file locations and names matter, and this is the step where you're talking about adding the application to the ostree commit.

If you'd rather leave it out here, it should be explained somewhere later in the doc.

>    - Application with the NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs.

Author: I'm not sure I understand. You mentioned that we "need to make the order issue clear up here" - do you mean runtime order / scheduling components pre-MicroShift at the right time?

>    - Application with the NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs.

Reviewer: Sorry, I wasn't clear.

The user has to carefully name their application manifests so they are loaded after Multus, if only so the NetworkAttachDefinition CRD is present at the point the application manifest that tries to use that API is loaded. Otherwise the loop to load manifests will block and startup will fail. That is not unique to Multus, of course, but we want to make sure that constraint is clearly spelled out in this design document, and eventually in the user docs.

1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.
1. Edge device boots:
1. (optional) Init procedures are configuring OS and networks
1. MicroShift starts
1. MicroShift applies Multus' manifests
1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that include NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
   **TODO: Make sure that App starts after Multus, otherwise it might got by-passed** - maybe crio override to use multus

> 1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 

Author: Just checked (hence the TODO :smile:) and we should be fine. When cluster starts, first Pods to be created and started are the one with `hostNetwork: true` - both ovn-k and multus have this.
If we configure cri-o to select multus as the default CNI (i.e. override [this](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/packaging/crio.conf.d/microshift-ovn.conf#L4)), then no Pod without `hostNetwork` will start before the Multus is available.
Also, by using `--readiness-indicator-file` Multus will wait for ovn-k.

> 1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 

Reviewer: Good, that's reassuring. Could you capture a note about that (maybe in the Risks section?) so we have a record to come back to in the future?

> 1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 

Author: No, that cri-o configuration will be shipped within microshift-multus RPM

First, it must be noted that Multus CNI itself is a meta-CNI. From high level perspective, its
purpose is to call other CNIs according to the CNI configs supplied by the user in form of
NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Pod annotations.
Any specific actions are related to the delegate CNIs itself. For example: creating veth pair,
attaching one end of veth to the bridge and making the other end available within the Pod is
responsibility of `bridge` CNI is this example.
MicroShift team will create tests for CNIs that will be declared as supported. However these tests
will not explore the breadth and depth of possible network setups, so ultimately responsible for
correctness of the configuration is the user.

#### Manifests

MicroShift will provide Multus based on thin architecture because of the resource consumption
(see alternatives for more information).
Because of the differences with OpenShift (which uses thick Multus plugin), existing OpenShift
manifests will require changes to make them suitable for MicroShift. These manifests will reside
in MicroShift repository.

Updating necessary image references will be part of existing rebase procedure.

#### RPM package

> RPM spec to build `microshift-networking-multus` RPM will be part of existing `microshift.spec` file.

Author: Agree. I think I saw `microshift-networking-multus` in some places already but that should not bind us.

RPM will include:
- manifests required to deploy Multus on MicroShift

> - CRI-O drop-in config to use Multus instead of ovn-kubernetes

Author: Yes, mentioned it in the gdoc but not here, yet

- greenboot healthcheck script
- cleanup script plugin

#### Container images: Multus and network plugins

Because Multus image used by OpenShift has size that is not acceptable for edge devices, new image
will be prepared and will only include relevant artifacts such as entrypoint script/binary and
Multus CNI binary (which is copied to host's `/opt/cni/bin`).

To supply network plugins (CNIs) such as bridge, vlan, macvlan, and so on a new image will be prepared
so MicroShift uses the same binaries as OpenShift (alternative is using RHEL's networkplugins RPM - see alternatives).
This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

#### Hypershift [optional]

No, enhancement is MicroShift specific.

### Risks and Mitigations

Taking `bridge` CNI as an example: when the bridge interface does not exist, it will be created
when a Pod requiring that interface is created.
If user expects something else will create the interface, they will need to configure system to start

> MicroShift after other services.

Author: I don't feel like it captures my intent here fully. If you [add a RHEL compute node](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/machine_management/adding-rhel-compute.html) to the OCP you'll get the same problem: if user wants to preconfigure the bridge before kubelet/Pods start, it must be ordered and timed correctly.

> MicroShift after other services.

Reviewer: That's a good point about RHEL worker nodes, so it's not _just_ an issue for MicroShift. So, maybe we just need to add that first sentence ("There may be a race condition between Multus on MicroShift and other services on the host that also configure the host's networking.")?

> MicroShift after other services.

Author: Added

Multus using thin plugin architecture creates a kubeconfig when the DaemonSet starts and copies it

> out of Pod to location on disk so the Multus CNI binary can use it to get NetworkAttachmentDefinitions

Author: It's `/opt/cni/bin`, I'd say it's **the** location. It can be configured with crio's `plugin_dirs` but it's the directory where ovn-k's binary already exists so I would not change it.

> out of Pod to location on disk so the Multus CNI binary can use it to get NetworkAttachmentDefinitions

Reviewer: OK, let's specify the path in the doc.

```suggestion
out of Pod to `/opt/cni/bin` on the host filesystem so the Multus CNI binary can use it to get NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
```

to these resources effective Pod must be re-created. This behavior is reasonable because it does not
disrupt Pod's networking and should not be a problem in production environments where we expect to
have stable configurations.

Multus also does not observe the underlying bridge interfaces, therefore if one is rebuilt, Pod's
interface might stop working (see [BZ #2066351](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2066351)).
If these limitations are ever addressed (see [NP-606](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-606) and 
[NP-608](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NP-608)), they would, most likely, be part of the thick
Multus plugin.

Even though these are limitation of the Multus itself, they should be documented.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

1. Clean up of Multus artifacts on disk during system rollback or when `microshift-cleanup-data` is executed:
   Should we invest in creating a lightweight plugin architecture to avoid adding cleanup of Multus
   to MicroShift's core cleanup script? This architecture could be based on existing
   [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) architecture

>    where plugins start with `kubectl-`, so we could use `microshift-cleanup-plugin-` prefix.

Author: Choice is between
- putting Multus' (non-failing in case of absence) cleanup in [microshift-cleanup-data script](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/scripts/microshift-cleanup-data.sh) which creates a weak link in the wrong direction (main product being aware of optional addon)
- > providing some dynamic way for an add-on to extend the cleanup

>    where plugins start with `kubectl-`, so we could use `microshift-cleanup-plugin-` prefix.

Reviewer: Your first option was what I meant by hard-coding, so I think we're on the same page.

I'm inclined to say we do want some plugin system. I'm not sure the kubectl pattern fits the best. We wouldn't want users to run a separate command, right? We want the main cleanup script to also run the cleanup steps for the plug-ins. Something like the pattern for init.d or greenboot fits better for that case.

Do we have to worry about ordering of plugins compared to the main microshift cleanup steps? Do we need a separate design document to describe how that would work?

>    where plugins start with `kubectl-`, so we could use `microshift-cleanup-plugin-` prefix.

Author: You're right, kubectl's plugin arch might not be best fit here.

> Do we have to worry about ordering of plugins compared to the main microshift cleanup steps? Do we need a separate design document to describe how that would work?

For multus cleanup, I think it doesn't matter too much, but it should be "bound" to `--ovn` option (which would also be executed on `--all`). And for now, I don't see other components that would need an additional cleanup (which essentially cleans up something on the host, not cluster).
That situation will change when we get to pluggable CNIs - I expect most of them to leave something on the host. So maybe for now we don't want to dive into this topic as we don't have concrete use case? Having couple of commands to remove Multus' stuff but not fail when they're not present seems good enough compared to the alternative which would definitely require design doc.

>    where plugins start with `kubectl-`, so we could use `microshift-cleanup-plugin-` prefix.

Reviewer: If we can describe a process for the user to run 2 commands in the right order instead of just 1, that seems good enough for a first iteration. We can put "plugins for the cleanup scripts" on the backlog as a feature for a future release.

overwriting any differences. However, MicroShift does not have any uninstall capabilities.
If manifests ever change, for example some ConfigMap is renamed, then these old parts will
keep existing in the etcd. This could have undesirable consequences of having two Multus DaemonSets
if name or namespace of original DaemonSet changes. To make potential the transition to thick Multus
smooth, we should not deviate from already existing resource names present in OpenShift's Multus
manifests. This problem is not Multus specific - it is how MicroShift works and it is not part of this
enhancement addressing this shortcoming.

Because of the way Multus works (checks Annotations when needed, executed when networking must be
set up, does not keep its own database beside cache) we can consider it to be mostly stateless.
When Multus CNI binary is executed by kubelet/CRI-O it will setup Pod's network according to the
configs and Annotations (not a database with "expected states"), therefore updating Multus does not
require migration strategies.

If schema of NetworkAttachmentDefinitions CRD changes, instead of deploying a mutating webhook,

> we can just suggest users to update their CRs.

Author: Yes, preparing new ostree commit is rather conscious decision so I think it'd be better to prepare new file up front instead of using webhook that uses resources idling 99.999% time. 
I'll expand that

### Version Skew Strategy

Building Multus and MicroShift RPMs from the same spec file means Multus should be updated together

> with MicroShift which means there should not be any version skew between MicroShift and Multus.

Author: True, but I think version skew of Multus between nodes will be much smaller problem compared to version skew of microshift nodes.

> with MicroShift which means there should not be any version skew between MicroShift and Multus.

Reviewer: That's fair. For now, mentioning that we anticipate it being a problem to solve is probably good enough. We should be able to use whatever pattern we plan to use to solve the same issue for other plugins, applications, etc. for the Multus case.

```
Warning  NoNetworkFound          0s                 multus             cannot find a network-attachment-definition (asdasd) in namespace (default): network-attachment-definitions.k8s.cni.cncf.io "asdasd" not found
```

To address such issues, user can:
- verify values in both NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Annotations,
- remove Annotation to verify if the Pod is created successfully with just the default network.

## Implementation History

<!-- Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`. -->

## Alternatives

### Thick plugin architecture

In 2022 Multus was rewritten in manner called "thick plugin" and changes mode of operation significantly.
Major difference is that DaemonSet is no longer dummy (i.e. Thin: creates kubeconfig, config, copies Multus
CNI binary to the host, and finally sleeps or watches files to update the kubeconfig and/or config).
Instead it is the brain of the operation: CNI binary on the host is only a shim that forwards the request
to the DaemonSet which executes all of the delegates. It also exports a metric, but it was not

> deemed useful.

Author: I think the conclusion was that the metric was only useful for telemetry

> deemed useful.

Reviewer: OK.

Decision to use thin instead of thick architecture is mostly driven by resource consumption:
Multus CNI binary in thin mode only uses resources when it runs and DaemonSet idles (or is close to it),
whereas thick Multus' DaemonSet is an application that uses resources even if there are no new Pods.

If we would decide to use thick plugin, we still would need to create new image as the one used in OCP
is not suitable for edge deployments (1.2GB). Another pro for thick plugin is that is has better
test coverage as it is used in OpenShift. Also, if there will be a new CNI spec that includes UPDATE

> command it thick has better chance of supporting that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command the thick plugin has better chance of supporting that.
```

Even though thin plugin suits MicroShift needs better, we should strive toward making as little
breaking changes as possible compared to OpenShift's thick multus when preparing manifests for
MicroShift's thin Multus.

See [Multus Thick Plugin](https://github.com/openshift/multus-cni/blob/master/docs/thick-plugin.md).

### Using network plugins from RHEL repositories

RHEL ships network plugins RPM that includes delegate CNIs we aim to support like `bridge`, `macvlan`, etc.
Originally that RPM was meant for Podman networking, but Podman shipped with RHEL9 does not use them anymore.
This means they can exist only for compatibility and are not actively maintained.
On the other hand, OpenShift networking team (with whom we have ongoing cooperation) are actively

> maintaining these binaries and quickly addressing any CVEs or bugs.

Reviewer: It's important to mention here that the binaries delivered by the networking team come in a container image as part of the OCP payload.

This functionality is Multus' trademark - adding additional interfaces to Pods.

This enhancement explores providing Multus CNI as an optional component to MicroShift.

## Motivation

Providing Multus CNI for MicroShift will help users:
- wanting to integrate MicroShift into existing environments
- wanting to slowly, step by step, migrate to MicroShift without being required to refactor everything at once
- wanting to add additional interfaces because of newly discovered requirements

### User Stories

* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  make them accessible over networks that should not be available to rest of the cluster.
* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  access them directly (from outside the cluster) without using Kubernetes' networking such as
  NodePorts, Load Balancers, Ingresses, etc.
* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  start slowly migrating an existing solution to MicroShift.

### Goals

> - Provide optional Multus CNI for MicroShift clusters that can be added to existing clusters

Author: done

### Non-Goals

- Automatically removing Multus from the cluster upon RPM uninstall
- Support Multus for multi-node deployments of MicroShift

> - Providing network policies or admission webhook for Multus

Author: What do you mean by "kubernetes service"? I don't see any `Service` in https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/tree/master/bindata/network/multus

> - Providing network policies or admission webhook for Multus

Reviewer 2: The service API in kubernetes: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/
It is not supported on secondary multus network, only available on primiary network.

> - Providing network policies or admission webhook for Multus

Author: Gotcha, makes sense, thx

## Proposal

Deliver Multus for MicroShift as an optional RPM containing required manifests that will be applied
during MicroShift's start. There should be little to no changes to MicroShift itself as we want
Multus CNI for MicroShift to fit optional components pattern.

Manifests for deploying Multus on MicroShift will be based on existing manifests for OpenShift,
but they will differ because OpenShift uses thick architecture Multus whereas MicroShift will use
thin architecture Multus.

How should cleanup of the Multus artifacts look like is an open question (see Open Questions section).

### Workflow Description

**User** is a human user responsible for setting up and managing Edge Devices.
**Application** is user's workload that intends to use additional interfaces.

> 1. User gathers all information about the networking environment of the edge device.

Reviewer 2: The workflow doesn't include installing multus to an existing microshift device. Is it not going to be supported? If so, it might be good to be called out in the Goals section.
Installing multus to existing devices will change the node configuration (e.g. crio.conf.d) and requires reboot to take effect (pod can be recreated with multus, crio to take the new config).

Author: I think it should be supported with accompanying reboot.

> 1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.

This step covers adding Multus at any stage of lifecycle of the device using ostree system - regardless whether it's first or subsequent commit.

However, I'll make it more explicit

Reviewer 2: Requiring a reboot after multus installation shall eliminate the issues I mentioned. +1

1. User prepares NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NAD) CRs that will allow Application to be part of the specified network.
1. User prepares ostree commit that contains:
   - (optional) Init procedures to configure OS for usage of the additional network
   - MicroShift RPMs
   - Multus for MicroShift RPM

>    - Application with the NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs.

Author: good point, done

1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.
1. Edge device boots:
1. (optional) Init procedures are configuring OS and networks
1. MicroShift starts
1. MicroShift applies Multus' manifests
1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that include NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 
   additional interfaces based on matching NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
1. Application's containers are running, they can utilize additional interfaces

### API Extensions

Multus is an established project with already existing API extensions.
Following paragraphs does not present brand new CRDs or APIs, it only aims to summarize how adding
Multus will affect MicroShift's API. For more information see
[Multus CNI repository](https://github.com/openshift/multus-cni/).

Multus is configured in following ways:

> - CNI configuration created when Multus' DaemonSet starts, it includes the primary CNI (ovn-kubernetes for MicroShift)

Reviewer 2: This implies that any other pods that use CNI network need to wait until multus pod is ready, which may result in slightly increased pod startup latency (for pods such as dns). Is it something we want to mention in drawback section?

Author: Done

kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: bridge-conf
spec:         
  config: '{                                
      "cniVersion": "0.3.0",
      "type": "bridge",
      "bridge": "test-bridge",
      "mode": "bridge",                                                   
      "ipam": {  
        "type": "host-local",
        "subnet": "192.168.20.0/24",
        "rangeStart": "192.168.20.200",
        "rangeEnd": "192.168.20.216",
        "routes": [
          { "dst": "0.0.0.0/0" }
        ],
        "gateway": "192.168.20.1"
      }
    }'
```

There are two Pod annotation that can be used to instruct Multus on how the networks should be set up.
Main one is `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` which specifies which NAD should be added to the Pod.
Multiple NADs can be specified by separating them with comma. NADs can be even reused.
Examples from Multus docs:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1                  
kind: Pod                        
metadata:
  name: samplepod  
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: bridge-conf
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: samplepod
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: bridge-conf,bridge-conf
```

> Other Pod annotation is `v1.multus-cni.io/default-network` which overrides default CNI from Multus'

Reviewer 3: Need to double check with @pliurh, the original author of `default-network` annotation, but as far as I know, this default-network annotation is desgined only for ovn migration and it is not in multus document as well. It might be better not to mention that in the document if there is no specific use-cases for microshift.

> Other Pod annotation is `v1.multus-cni.io/default-network` which overrides default CNI from Multus'

Author: removed mention of it

configuration file (created on DaemonSet start). This annotation is optional and its absence means
Pod's default network will be ovn-kubernetes.

Information about the Pod's interfaces are reported back by Multus also as an annotation `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status`.
Example below shows annotations of a Pod with two `bridge` CNI interfaces:
```yaml
Annotations:      k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status:
                    [{
                        "name": "ovn-kubernetes",
                        "interface": "eth0",
                        "ips": [
                            "10.42.0.14"
                        ],
                        "mac": "0a:58:0a:2a:00:0e",
                        "default": true,
                        "dns": {}
                    },{
                        "name": "default/bridge-conf",
                        "interface": "net1",
                        "ips": [
                            "192.168.20.202"
                        ],
                        "mac": "b2:6a:5c:ba:34:9a",
                        "dns": {},
                        "gateway": [

>                             "\u003cnil\u003e"

Author: TBH I don't know. It looks funky to me but this is what I got from the annotations when using Multus...

>                             "\u003cnil\u003e"

Reviewer 2: @s1061123  this sounds like a bug?

>                             "\u003cnil\u003e"

Reviewer: `\u003c` is `<` and `\u003e` is `>` so it looks like something is turning `<nil>` into a unicode byte string when it renders the annotation as JSON.

>                             "\u003cnil\u003e"

Reviewer 3: So this is happen because host-local IPAM plugin is used with wrong configuration. As described https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/ipam/host-local/, `gateway` configuration should be in `range` section.

With following net-attach-def, 

```
---
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: bridge-conf-1
spec:
  config: '{
            "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "testbr1",
            "ipam": {
                "type": "host-local",
                "ranges": [
                    [
                        {
                            "subnet": "10.10.0.0/16",
                            "rangeStart": "10.10.1.20",
                            "rangeEnd": "10.10.3.50",
                            "gateway": "10.10.0.254"
                        }
                    ]
                ],
                "dataDir": "/var/lib/cni/testbr1"
            }
        }'
```

Then get the following result (gateway is configured in eth0 hence no gateway in net1)

```
    annotations:
      k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status: |-
        [{
            "name": "cbr0",
            "interface": "eth0",
            "ips": [
                "10.244.1.2"
            ],
            "mac": "5a:a3:ef:74:d1:36",
            "default": true,
            "dns": {},
            "gateway": [
                "10.244.1.1"
            ]
        },{
            "name": "default/bridge-conf-1",
            "interface": "net1",
            "ips": [
                "10.10.1.20"
            ],
            "mac": "7e:07:16:b2:ef:c5",
            "dns": {}
        }]
```

>                             "\u003cnil\u003e"

Author: Thanks! I used the snippet to update the enhancement

                            "192.168.20.203"
                        ],
                        "mac": "7a:ca:cf:19:64:e8",
                        "dns": {},
                        "gateway": [
                            "\u003cnil\u003e"
                        ]
                    }]
                  k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: bridge-conf,bridge-conf
```

There is an annotation for NetworkAttachmentDefinition - `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName`.
It is used when some CNI requires information about specific device that is prepared by device plugin.
It is primarily used with SR-IOV and as such out of scope for this enhancement mentioned only for completeness.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

First, it must be noted that Multus CNI itself is a meta-CNI. From a high level perspective, its
purpose is to call other CNIs according to the CNI configs supplied by the user in form of
NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Pod annotations.
Any specific actions are related to the delegate CNIs. For example: creating veth pair,
attaching one end of veth to the bridge and making the other end available within the Pod is
responsibility of `bridge` CNI is this example.

> MicroShift team will create tests for CNIs that will be declared as supported. However these tests

Reviewer 3: > MicroShift team will create tests for CNIs that will be declared as supported.

Based on previous discussion, microshift will support the part of cni plugin for now (e.g. sr-iov plugin is not supported). So could you mention that 'MicroShift will support some of CNI plugin' (otherwise reader may misunderstand MicroShift will support same CNI plugin that OCP supports).

Author: I made it more explicit in `### Goals` which CNIs and IPAMs we intend to ship and support.

will not explore the breadth and depth of possible network setups, so ultimately the responsibility
for correctness of the configuration is up to the user.

> #### Manifests

Reviewer 2: Do we need to change ovnk manifest to copy/write the ovn-k8s-overlay-cni/cni-config-file to different directories? (crio may pick up the wrong CNI config file if ovnk keeps writing the file to default crio cni config directory, this may happen as ovnk uses hostnetwork, it doesn't have to wait for multus to start)

Author: `microshift-multus` will have a drop-in config for CRI-O that will explicitly set `cni_default_network` to multus, so CRI-O will be forced to wait for multus.
In other words, it will override [this setting](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/packaging/crio.conf.d/11-microshift-ovn.conf#L4)

Reviewer 2: When multus drop-in config is installed, will it take effect immediately. I remember having to restart crio in a test env, but not sure if it is necessary.

Author: Yes. But as mentioned in other comments and added to the enhancement, we'll instruct users to reboot the host after installing multus

MicroShift will provide Multus based on thin architecture because of the resource consumption
(see alternatives for more information).
Because of the differences with OpenShift (which uses thick Multus plugin), existing OpenShift
manifests will require changes to make them suitable for MicroShift. These manifests will reside
in MicroShift repository.

Updating necessary image references will be part of existing rebase procedure.

#### RPM package

RPM spec to build `microshift-multus` and `microshift-multus-release-info` RPMs will be part of
existing `microshift.spec` file.
The RPM will include:
- manifests required to deploy Multus on MicroShift
- CRI-O drop-in config to use Multus instead of ovn-kubernetes (which will require reorganization
  of currently existing MicroShift's CRI-O configs)
- greenboot healthcheck script
- cleanup script plugin

#### Container images: Multus and network plugins

Because the Multus image used by OpenShift has a large size that is not acceptable for edge devices, new image

> will be prepared and will only include relevant artifacts such as entrypoint script/binary and

Reviewer 2: Will these new images be part of openshift payload? If so, it would be good to call it out.

Author: done

Multus CNI binary (which is copied to host's `/opt/cni/bin`).

> To supply network plugins (CNIs) such as bridge, vlan, macvlan, and so on a new image will be prepared

Author: I changed it to `ipvlan` as this is one we talked about.

so MicroShift uses the same binaries as OpenShift (alternative is using RHEL's networkplugins RPM - see alternatives).

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Author: That's a good point, this makes sense. Let's ask @DanielFroehlich

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Reviewer: How many other things does the CNO do to manage Multus? Should we be considering building an operator based on a subset of that code?

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Author: @zshi-redhat @s1061123 keep me honest but looking at the CNO's code, in regards to Multus, it's mostly rendering and deployment of [manifests](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator/tree/master/bindata/network/multus) and I see following pieces of templating logic: SDN/OVN, optional DHCP server, and optional whereabouts reconciler.

We learned that for dhcp/dynamic IPAM we need dhcp server. whereabouts is not required, but I think shipping it would mean just adding RBAC and DaemonSet, nothing fancy

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Reviewer: OK, that works for me. Please add that info to the alternatives section before you resolve this thread.

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Reviewer 2: whereabouts is not needed as microshift is single node, host-local shall be sufficient.
whereabouts is mainly to address the issue that host-local doesn't have a full view of IPs assigned to each node in a multi-node cluster, so it has a centralized controller that allocates/deallocates IPs cluster wide. host-local uses a local file to track which IP is assigned to which Pod, so it doesn't scale with two or more nodes.

For multus daemonset specifically, it renders multus plugin itself, containernetworking-plugins, whereabouts-cni, whereabouts-reconciler, bond-cni . Other multus related manifests in CNO includes multus-admission-controller, network-daemon-metrics, dhcp-daemonset.

multus-admission-controller, it was mentioned as non-goal in this enhancement
network-daemon-metrics, this is about exposing promethus metrics of how many net-attach-def is used and how many pods are using multus secondary network. not sure if this is of interest of microshift user.

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Author: @zshi-redhat what's the difference between `dhcp` and `whereabouts`?
Sound like they're very similar, but whereabouts it complete packages whereas with `dhcp`, even though you have DHCP DaemonSet, you still need DHCP server?
So with dhcp you can assign IPs to Pods from your network, but how does it look with whereabouts?

> This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Reviewer 2: dhcp and whereabouts are two different IPAM plugins.
dhcp relies on external dhcp server to grant IPs, it requires dhcp-daemonset to restore the lease.
whereabouts allows user to define a range of IPs that can be allocated to multus secondary networks, it runs everything in the cluster itself and manages the IP pool to avoid overlapping and do garbage collection.

so both of them are used to assign IP to secondary pod network. for dhcp, pods get IP from external dhcp server. for whereabouts, pods get IP from whereabout controller.

   to MicroShift's core cleanup script? This architecture could be based on existing
   [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) architecture
   where plugins start with `kubectl-`, so we could use `microshift-cleanup-plugin-` prefix.

### Test Plan

Multus CNI for MicroShift will be tested using existing test harness. New test suite will be created
with simple test for each CNI we want to declare as supported.

Starting with `bridge` test shall: install Multus, create NetworkAttachmentDefinition and deploy
a Pod that should have additional interface attached. After verifying that the interface is present,
test will try to access Pod's application using the bridge interface on the host to make sure there
is a connectivity.

Tests for other networking plugins will be designed and implemented when plugins are planned for support.

### Graduation Criteria

Multus CNI for MicroShift is targeted to be GA next release.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> Because both Multus and MicroShift RPMs will be built from the same spec file, they will share the

Reviewer 2: Do we consider upgrading from a 4.15 cluster to a multus-enabled 4.16 cluster? or is it not possible.
There might be some cleanup work needs to be done for the upgraded cluster to use Multus correctly (for example, remove the old node CNI config file written by ovn-kubernetes, since the new config file will be created in another directory)

Author: I actually decided to not change the directories: keep configs in `/etc/cni/net.d` and binaries in `/opt/cni/bin` so it's easy plug n play.

Reviewer 2: If we keep the config in the same directory, would there be such situation that:
1. ovnk writes its CNI config under /etc/cni/net.d
2. node become ready
3. pod starts with ovnk CNI
4. multus pod ready and update the CNI config under /etc/cni/net.d
5. other pods start with Multus CNI

Is it guaranteed that multus pod becomes ready before ovnk?

Reviewer 2: never mind, I learned in the previous comment that we want to force a reboot after multus installation which shall guarantee that crio use the multus generated CNI config file.

Author: Yes. Also, from my testing, if we configure CRI-O with `cni_default_network = "multus"`, then even if the ovn-k's config exists, the Node will not be ready because of "no ready cni"

Reviewer: How much does enabling Multus change the startup timing of the other core MicroShift pods? Does the healthcheck used by the greenboot script need to be updated to take that into account, or are we still within the limits built into the script?

Author: I don't have data to back this up, but creating cluster with images present I expect startup of multus to be quicker than ovnk's (Multus will wait for ovnk).

require migration strategies.

If the schema of NetworkAttachmentDefinitions CRD changes, instead of deploying a mutating webhook
(which would use resources idling but actually perform actions on first start), we can just suggest
users to update their CRs.

### Version Skew Strategy

Building Multus and MicroShift RPMs from the same spec file means Multus should be updated together
with MicroShift which means there should not be any version skew between MicroShift and Multus.
This might change with introduction of multi-node deployments of MicroShift.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A

#### Failure Modes

If Multus (or any delegate CNIs it executes) fails, a new Pod will be stuck in "ContainerCreating" status
and none of the Pod's containers will start. This can happen if the CNI configuration provided in
NetworkAttachmentDefinition is incorrect or when Pod's Annotation contains NAD that does not exist.
In such cases, user needs to verify its manifests.

Pods without Multus' Annotation will be set up with the default CNI (ovn-kubernetes) and should not
have increased CNI failure rate.

#### Support Procedures

> 

Reviewer 2: One other support procedure might be to configure multus to redirect log to local file.
Multus thin plugin mode doesn't provide stdout logs in its container like other long-running CNI (ovn-kubernetes) does. If any failure in multus binary itself, the stdout can only be retrieved by updating multus cni config to redirect log to local file: https://github.com/openshift/multus-cni/blob/master/docs/configuration.md#writing-to-a-log-file

Reviewer 3: Multus messages in pod events are mainly for users (just for 'events'). More multus messages are captured by crio/kubelet journal logs, so please describe that in this section.

Reviewer 3: Example

```
[fedora@kube-node-1 ~]$ journalctl -u kubelet | tail
(snip)
Feb 06 14:27:31 kube-node-1 kubelet[13551]: E0206 14:27:31.893101   13551 kuberuntime_manager.go:1172] "CreatePodSandbox for pod failed" err="rpc error: code = Unknown desc = failed to create pod network sandbox k8s_fedora_default_228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e_0(dae451e8aaf3e9bff94ce8c1e2dc3918b46db2334f88f028c5e5d59b8156bf06): error adding pod default_fedora to CNI network \"multus-cni-network\": plugin type=\"multus\" name=\"multus-cni-network\" failed (add): [default/fedora/228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e:macvlan-conf-1]: error adding container to network \"macvlan-conf-1\": Link not found" pod="default/fedora"
Feb 06 14:27:31 kube-node-1 kubelet[13551]: E0206 14:27:31.893286   13551 pod_workers.go:1298] "Error syncing pod, skipping" err="failed to \"CreatePodSandbox\" for \"fedora_default(228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e)\" with CreatePodSandboxError: \"Failed to create sandbox for pod \\\"fedora_default(228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e)\\\": rpc error: code = Unknown desc = failed to create pod network sandbox k8s_fedora_default_228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e_0(dae451e8aaf3e9bff94ce8c1e2dc3918b46db2334f88f028c5e5d59b8156bf06): error adding pod default_fedora to CNI network \\\"multus-cni-network\\\": plugin type=\\\"multus\\\" name=\\\"multus-cni-network\\\" failed (add): [default/fedora/228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e:macvlan-conf-1]: error adding container to network \\\"macvlan-conf-1\\\": Link not found\"" pod="default/fedora" podUID="228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e"

[fedora@kube-node-1 ~]$ journalctl -u crio | tail
(snip)
Feb 06 14:28:44 kube-node-1 crio[11778]: 2024-02-06T14:28:44+09:00 [verbose] Del: default:fedora:228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e:cbr0:eth0 {"cniVersion":"0.3.1","name":"cbr0","plugins":[{"delegate":{"hairpinMode":true,"isDefaultGateway":true},"type":"flannel"},{"capabilities":{"portMappings":true},"type":"portmap"}]}
Feb 06 14:28:44 kube-node-1 crio[11778]: 2024-02-06T14:28:44+09:00 [debug] conflistDel: &{1ae5a8f8270afbe7faa5e54ed636692bae72fb73ab9ca0132e8e66307b34b696 /var/run/netns/bc624229-b577-40e3-ad41-7af830a909bc eth0 [[IgnoreUnknown true] [K8S_POD_NAMESPACE default] [K8S_POD_NAME fedora] [K8S_POD_INFRA_CONTAINER_ID 1ae5a8f8270afbe7faa5e54ed636692bae72fb73ab9ca0132e8e66307b34b696] [K8S_POD_UID 228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e] [IgnoreUnknown 1] [K8S_POD_NAMESPACE default] [K8S_POD_NAME fedora] [K8S_POD_INFRA_CONTAINER_ID 1ae5a8f8270afbe7faa5e54ed636692bae72fb73ab9ca0132e8e66307b34b696] [K8S_POD_UID 228fdcfa-dfc3-46de-b0b5-d996457f7d7e]] map[] }, {"cniVersion":"0.3.1","name":"cbr0","plugins":[{"delegate":{"hairpinMode":true,"isDefaultGateway":true},"type":"flannel"},{"capabilities":{"portMappings":true},"type":"portmap"}]}
```

Author: Thanks, added kubelet, but I don't see these logs in crio even though I configured `log_level = "trace"`.
I think it might be worth it after all to enable logging in the multus itself (`--multus-log-file`, `--multus-log-level`), WDYT?

Reviewer 3: - as far as I checked upstream, crio captures the logs as above. I don't know why. Does microshift uses special crio?
- it is trade-off to disk space and debuggability. I don't have clear picture how to troubleshoot in microshift. If you have such troubleshoot process, it might be added.

Author: Added `log-file` as open question.
I don't know about the crio - tried setting the log level, playing with different log settings for multus and still didn't get that kind of log. Maybe I'll find something during implementation phase

If Multus cannot configure a Pod's networking according to the annotations (any of the CNIs fail),
the Pod will not start and its events should contain error from the Multus. For example:
```
Warning  NoNetworkFound          0s                 multus             cannot find a network-attachment-definition (asdasd) in namespace (default): network-attachment-definitions.k8s.cni.cncf.io "asdasd" not found
```

To address such issues, user can:
- verify values in both NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Annotations,
- remove Annotation to verify if the Pod is created successfully with just the default network.

## Implementation History

<!-- Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`. -->

## Alternatives

### Thick plugin architecture

> In 2022 Multus was rewritten in manner called "thick plugin" which changed its mode of operation significantly.

Reviewer 3: 'thick plugin' is not 'rewrite multus', actually. Just provided as 'new multus type', in addition to current multus plugin. So multus community supporots both plugin type and there is no plan to consolidate into one in the community.

Author: I changed the wording to "recreated"

> Deployment of new commit requires reboot which will force recreation of the Pod networking after adding Multus.

1. User gathers all information about the networking environment of the edge device.
1. User prepares NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NAD) CRs that will allow Application to be part of the specified network.
1. User prepares ostree commit that contains:
   - (optional) Init procedures to configure OS for usage of the additional network
   - MicroShift RPMs
   - Multus for MicroShift RPM
   - NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs
   - Application using mentioned NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs
1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.
1. Edge device boots:
1. (optional) Init procedures are configuring OS and networks
1. MicroShift starts
1. MicroShift applies Multus' manifests
1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that include NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 
   additional interfaces based on matching NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
1. Application's containers are running, they can utilize additional interfaces

#### Installation and usage on RHEL (rpm)

> ##### Adding to existing MicroShift cluster

Reviewer: We could add this to the existing RPM test scenario.

Author: Great idea, added this to testing plan

  NodePorts, Load Balancers, Ingresses, etc.
* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  start slowly migrating an existing solution to MicroShift.

### Goals

- Provide optional Multus CNI for MicroShift clusters that can be added to existing clusters
- Provide container network plugins that are planned to be supported with MicroShift and Multus,
  meaning:
  - IPAMs: host-local, dhcp, static
  - CNIs:
    - bridge - must have
    - macvlan, ipvlan - stretch goal

### Non-Goals

- Automatically removing Multus from the cluster upon RPM uninstall
- Support Multus for multi-node deployments of MicroShift
- Providing network policies, support for Services via CNIs other than ovn-kubernetes,
  or admission webhook for Multus

## Proposal

Deliver Multus for MicroShift as an optional RPM containing required manifests that will be applied
during MicroShift's start. There should be little to no changes to MicroShift itself as we want
Multus CNI for MicroShift to fit optional components pattern.

Manifests for deploying Multus on MicroShift will be based on existing manifests for OpenShift,

> but they will differ because OpenShift uses thick architecture Multus whereas MicroShift will use

Author: done, thx

will be prepared and will only include relevant artifacts such as entrypoint script/binary and
Multus CNI binary (which is copied to host's `/opt/cni/bin`).

To supply network plugins (CNIs) such as `bridge`, `ipvlan`, and `macvlan` a new image will be prepared
so MicroShift uses the same binaries as OpenShift (alternative is using RHEL's networkplugins RPM - see alternatives).
This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Both of these images will be part of the OpenShift payload which MicroShift references during rebase procedure.

#### Hypershift [optional]

No, enhancement is MicroShift specific.

### Risks and Mitigations

There may be a race condition between Multus on MicroShift and other services on the host that also
configure the host's networking
Taking `bridge` CNI as an example: when the bridge interface does not exist, it will be created
when a Pod requiring that interface is created.
If user expects something else will create the interface, they will need to configure system to start
MicroShift after other services.

Multus using thin plugin architecture creates a kubeconfig when the DaemonSet starts and copies it

> out of Pod to `/opt/cni/bin` on the host filesystem so the Multus CNI binary can use it to get

Reviewer 2: '/opt/cni/bin' is for cni binary path, not kubeconfig.
I forgot which path does multus place the kubeconfig.

Author: You're right, fixed it

NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Pod annotations. The file is owned and readable only by root, so
the risk of someone gaining access to the cluster after logging into the host can be compared to
getting access to `/var/lib/microshift/resources/kubeadmin/kubeconfig`.

Currently MicroShift runs as a single-node cluster but in future releases there might be an effort
to allow for multi-node clusters. For this reason, during implementation of this enhancement, no
assumption that MicroShift will always run as a single-node should be made and potential multi-node
should be kept in mind. We will not build the solution to support multi-node, but want to avoid

> making decisions that make it harder to do so in the future.

Reviewer 2: good to know! so there is a possibility whereabouts is needed in the future when multi-node is introduced.

#### RPM package

RPM spec to build `microshift-multus` and `microshift-multus-release-info` RPMs will be part of
existing `microshift.spec` file.
The RPM will include:
- manifests required to deploy Multus on MicroShift
- CRI-O drop-in config to use Multus instead of ovn-kubernetes (which will require reorganization
  of currently existing MicroShift's CRI-O configs)
- greenboot healthcheck script
- cleanup script plugin

#### Container images: Multus and network plugins

Because the Multus image used by OpenShift has a large size that is not acceptable for edge devices, new image
will be prepared and will only include relevant artifacts such as entrypoint script/binary and
Multus CNI binary (which is copied to host's `/opt/cni/bin`).

To supply network plugins (CNIs) such as `bridge`, `ipvlan`, and `macvlan` a new image will be prepared
so MicroShift uses the same binaries as OpenShift (alternative is using RHEL's networkplugins RPM - see alternatives).
This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Both of these images will be part of the OpenShift payload which MicroShift references during rebase procedure.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 4: I think it might be possible to create a NAD that impacts the microshift host's networking, e.g.

```
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: troublemaker-nad
spec:
  config: '{
      "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
      "type": "macvlan", 
      "master": "enp1s0",  # Shares the host's main interface
      "ipam": {
          "type": "host-local",
          "subnet": "10.42.0.0/24",  # Overlaps with pod network range
          "routes": [
              {"dst": "0.0.0.0/0", "gw": "10.42.0.100/24"}  # Arbitrary default route
          ] 
      }
   }'
```
If so, this risk presumedly also exists for standard openshift cluster. To what extent are we going to rely on Openshift's multus documentation?

Author: Good catch, thanks! Added to the risks.
In general I think we want to reuse as much as possible of what's relevant to MicroShift.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 4: I think it might be possible to create a NAD that impacts the microshift host's networking, e.g.

```
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: troublemaker-nad
spec:
  config: '{
      "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
      "type": "macvlan", 
      "master": "enp1s0",  # Shares the host's main interface
      "ipam": {
          "type": "host-local",
          "subnet": "10.42.0.0/24",  # Overlaps with pod network range
          "routes": [
              {"dst": "0.0.0.0/0", "gw": "10.42.0.100/24"}  # Arbitrary default route
          ] 
      }
   }'
```
If so, this risk presumedly also exists for standard openshift cluster. To what extent are we going to rely on Openshift's multus documentation?

---
title: multus-cni-for-microshift
authors:
  - pmtk
reviewers:
  - s1061123, Multus expert
  - pliurh, Networking expert
  - dhellmann, MicroShift architect
  - jerpeter1, Edge Enablement Staff Engineer
  - pacevedom, MicroShift team lead
approvers:
  - dhellmann
api-approvers:
  - None
creation-date: 2024-01-16
last-updated: 2024-02-06
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-473
# see-also:
#   - "/enhancements/this-other-neat-thing.md"
# replaces:
#   - "/enhancements/that-less-than-great-idea.md"
# superseded-by:
#   - "/enhancements/our-past-effort.md"
---

# Multus CNI for MicroShift

## Summary

Currently MicroShift ships [ovn-kubernetes](https://github.com/openshift/ovn-kubernetes) (ovn-k)
CNI responsible for connectivity within and outside the cluster.

> There are users that have needs beyond what ovn-k offers like adding more interfaces to the Pods.

Author: I'm not aware of any. It wasn't mentioned in any multus related documentation

Some example requirements are connecting Pods to the host's bridge interface or setting up complex networking based on VLAN.
This functionality is Multus' trademark - adding additional interfaces to Pods.

> This enhancement explores providing Multus CNI as an optional component to MicroShift.

Author: Yes it can. RPM wise, it's the same like e.g. OLM:
```
[[packages]]
name = "microshift-multus"
version = "*"
```
It can be used in disconnected clusters - image references will be in `microshift-multus-release-info` RPM.

## Motivation

Providing Multus CNI for MicroShift will help users:

> - wanting to integrate MicroShift into existing environments

Author: Multus is something extra, everything so far we have about ovn-k still applies. But if you could point me to where current network architecture resides I'd be happy to double check

> - wanting to slowly, step by step, migrate to MicroShift without being required to refactor everything at once

Author: If customer has apps running using podman and uses some CNI plugin for them, then they can transform the apps into Pods and run on microshift, but instead of throwing everything away and switching to k8s way of exposing services, they can use multus to keep using that CNI they have so the rest of the environment can stay the same (otherwise whole network might need to be reconfigured and applications on the other side would need to call these migrated apps in different way (different port, interface, etc.)).

- wanting to add additional interfaces because of newly discovered requirements

### User Stories

* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  make them accessible over networks that should not be available to rest of the cluster.

> * As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can

Author: I believe that's possible. Actually there's nothing we can do to prohibit that if the NetworkAttachmentDefinition is created like that. I don't know the detail how that would work, but it would be an additional interface - the "original" k8s interface from microshift's ovnk network will continue to be primary interface

  access them directly (from outside the cluster) without using Kubernetes' networking such as
  NodePorts, Load Balancers, Ingresses, etc.
* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add additional interfaces to certain Pods so that I can
  start slowly migrating an existing solution to MicroShift.

### Goals

- Provide optional Multus CNI for MicroShift clusters that can be added to existing clusters
- Provide container network plugins that are planned to be supported with MicroShift and Multus,
  meaning:
  - IPAMs: host-local, dhcp, static
  - CNIs:

>     - bridge - must have

Author: No, that bridge can be used from the host. That will be one of the tests - Pod exposing http over bridge based interface that should be available (curl) from the host.

    - macvlan, ipvlan - stretch goal

### Non-Goals

- Automatically removing Multus from the cluster upon RPM uninstall
- Support Multus for multi-node deployments of MicroShift
- Providing network policies, support for Services via CNIs other than ovn-kubernetes,
  or admission webhook for Multus

## Proposal

Deliver Multus for MicroShift as an optional RPM containing required manifests that will be applied
during MicroShift's start. There should be little to no changes to MicroShift itself as we want
Multus CNI for MicroShift to fit optional components pattern.

Manifests for deploying Multus on MicroShift will be based on existing manifests for OpenShift,
but they will differ because OpenShift uses thick architecture Multus since 4.14 whereas MicroShift

> will use thin architecture Multus.

Author: No, nothing about the NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and how they tie together with the CNI plugins changes.
Difference between these architectures is mostly where the brain of the operation resides (in thin arch it's the multus CNI plugin residing on the host that does the job, in thick architecture it's the daemonset).

How should cleanup of the Multus artifacts look like is an open question (see Open Questions section).

### Workflow Description

**User** is a human user responsible for setting up and managing Edge Devices.
**Application** is user's workload that intends to use additional interfaces.

#### Installation and usage on RHEL For Edge (ostree)

> In this workflow, it doesn't matter if the device is already running R4E with existing MicroShift cluster.
> Deployment of new commit requires reboot which will force recreation of the Pod networking after adding Multus.

> 1. User gathers all information about the networking environment of the edge device.

Author: That depends on their network setup and their particular needs (use case).
Customers need to know what CNI plugin they need and how to configure it.
For example, if their device has 2 ethernet ports - 1st one is used as general (maybe for management), 2nd one has some other network they want their Pods to use with [macvlan plugin](https://www.cni.dev/plugins/current/main/macvlan/) - they need to know the name of that 2nd interface so they can specify it in the configuration.
With bridge CNI, if the want to use one bridge with some of the Pods and other bridge with different set of Pods (or maybe overlapping) - if those bridges are created by something else, then they need to specify bridge interface names in these NetworkAttachmentDefinitions.
I'm not sure if these are actual use cases, but these are doable examples

1. User prepares NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NAD) CRs that will allow Application to be part of the specified network.
1. User prepares ostree commit that contains:
   - (optional) Init procedures to configure OS for usage of the additional network
   - MicroShift RPMs
   - Multus for MicroShift RPM
   - NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs
   - Application using mentioned NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs
1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.
1. Edge device boots:
1. (optional) Init procedures are configuring OS and networks
1. MicroShift starts
1. MicroShift applies Multus' manifests
1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that include NetworkAttachmentDefinitions
1. Application's Pod are created, Multus inspects Pod's annotations and sets up 
   additional interfaces based on matching NetworkAttachmentDefinitions

> 1. Application's containers are running, they can utilize additional interfaces

Author: CNIs are set up before the Pod really starts, so when application starts, the interfaces already exists (if any of the CNI exit with error, the Pod will not start).

About the "they want" part - application must know what interfaces it needs before it makes use of it - there's no magic here; if the app should expose something only over extra interface, it needs to know what interface it's looking for.

#### Installation and usage on RHEL (rpm)

##### Adding to existing MicroShift cluster

1. MicroShift already runs on the device.
1. User installs `microshift-multus` RPM

> 1. User reboots the host

Author: You mean in context of "let crio know it should use multus instead of ovnk"? That config comes with microshift-multus RPM

1. Host boots, MicroShift starts and deploys Multus from the manifests.d.
1. User creates NetworkAttachmentDefinition CRs

> 1. User deploys application that uses NetworkAttachmentDefinitions

Author: By "we changed the IP address range" you mean that we edited NetworkAttachmentDefinition to use different CIDR? If so, then nothing like that happens - NADs are only consulted when Pod is created, so Pods must be deleted to pick up new configuration.

It is used when some CNI requires information about specific device that is prepared by device plugin.
It is primarily used with SR-IOV and as such out of scope for this enhancement mentioned only for completeness.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Not applicable

#### Standalone Clusters

Not applicable

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

Enhancement is solely intended for MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

First, it must be noted that Multus CNI itself is a meta-CNI. From a high level perspective, its
purpose is to call other CNIs according to the CNI configs supplied by the user in form of
NetworkAttachmentDefinitions and Pod annotations.
Any specific actions are related to the delegate CNIs. For example: creating veth pair,
attaching one end of veth to the bridge and making the other end available within the Pod is
responsibility of `bridge` CNI is this example.
MicroShift team will create tests for CNIs that will be declared as supported. However these tests
will not explore the breadth and depth of possible network setups, so ultimately the responsibility

> for correctness of the configuration is up to the user.

Author: There's whole ["Multiple networks" section in OpenShift docs](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.15/networking/multiple_networks/understanding-multiple-networks.html)

#### Manifests

MicroShift will provide Multus based on thin architecture because of the resource consumption
(see alternatives for more information).
Because of the differences with OpenShift (which uses thick Multus plugin), existing OpenShift
manifests will require changes to make them suitable for MicroShift. These manifests will reside

> in MicroShift repository.

Author: It's like OLM - we provide RPM with manifests and there's no way to customize them further at a later stage. If someone wants to change the behavior then they can fork, change it and rebuild.

Something like this would require support for Helm in addition to kustomize, or provide some microshift specific Helm-like some mechanism to customize the kustomize manifests

The RPM will include:
- manifests required to deploy Multus on MicroShift
- CRI-O drop-in config to use Multus instead of ovn-kubernetes (which will require reorganization
  of currently existing MicroShift's CRI-O configs)
- greenboot healthcheck script
- cleanup script plugin

#### Container images: Multus and network plugins

Because the Multus image used by OpenShift has a large size that is not acceptable for edge devices, new image
will be prepared and will only include relevant artifacts such as entrypoint script/binary and
Multus CNI binary (which is copied to host's `/opt/cni/bin`).

To supply network plugins (CNIs) such as `bridge`, `ipvlan`, and `macvlan` a new image will be prepared
so MicroShift uses the same binaries as OpenShift (alternative is using RHEL's networkplugins RPM - see alternatives).
This image will also contain IPAM binaries such as `static`, `dynamic (DHCP)`, and `host-local`.

Both of these images will be part of the OpenShift payload which MicroShift references during rebase procedure.

### Risks and Mitigations

There may be a race condition between Multus on MicroShift and other services on the host that also
configure the host's networking

> Taking `bridge` CNI as an example: when the bridge interface does not exist, it will be created

Reviewer 5: What makes the pod "know" it needs that bridge? Can the bridge be created when it wasn't intended?

Author: By Pod you mean actual Pod or the application running inside it?
If `Pod`, then you need to add annotation so the Multus knows which NetworkAttachmentDefinitions should use.
If the app - the app needs to be written in such way it knows there's some extra interface (or just serve on all interfaces).

> Can the bridge be created when it wasn't intended?

Bridge will be created when a Pod (that mentions in the annotation NAD that uses bridge CNI and specifies some bridge name) is being created.
It wouldn't happen any other way, like accidentally.
Pods is being created -> it wants bridge NAD -> bridge CNI runs -> bridge interface doesn't exist -> bridge interface is created

when a Pod requiring that interface is created.

> If user expects something else will create the interface, they will need to configure system to start

Reviewer 5: Would this a boot-order type of config done on RHEL? Is there a generic link we can provide for users?

Author: Yes, this is system (RHEL) level configuration. More specifically it's systemd - they would create service that's `Before` `microshift.service`. 
There's RHEL documentation about creating systemd service files: `Using systemd unit files to customize and optimize your system` > `1. Working with systemd unit files` > `1.4. Important [Unit] section options` (`Before` is mentioned in context of `After`)

assumption that MicroShift will always run as a single-node should be made and potential multi-node
should be kept in mind. We will not build the solution to support multi-node, but want to avoid
making decisions that make it harder to do so in the future.

Another potential risk was investigated but judged as not a problem: could a race condition between
Multus being ready and application's Pods starting impact the application, by for example not having
relevant parts of network set up.
This should not be an issue because Pods that do not use `hostNetwork` will have networking setup
after the CNI is ready. Both ovn-kubernetes and Multus use `hostNetwork` so they start before other
Pods. If CRI-O is configured to use the Multus regardless of files in /etc/cni/net.d, CRI-O will wait
for the Multus. We can also use the Multus' config option of `--readiness-indicator-file` to make
sure the Multus waits for the ovn-kubernetes.

Another existing risk is users creating NetworkAttachmentDefinitions that want to reuse MicroShift's
networks such as `10.42.0.0/16`, `10.43.0.0/16`, `10.44.0.0/16`, or `169.254.169.1/29`.

> We should warn users they should not use them unless they reconfigure MicroShift's networking to use

Reviewer 5: What happens if users don't add other networks and reuse the default settings?

Author: Hard for me to say exactly, someone from networking team would know better.
But if user reuses `10.42.0.0/16`, which is used by primary ovn-k CNI, then I would expect problems with routing - the Pod wouldn't be able to access ApiServer (if the second CNI would overwrite ovnk's routing), or some services if other CIDR is used.

manifests. This problem is not Multus specific - it is how MicroShift works and it is not part of this
enhancement addressing this shortcoming.

Because of the way Multus works (checks Annotations when needed, executed when networking must be
set up, does not keep its own database beside cache) we can consider it to be mostly stateless.
When Multus CNI binary is executed by kubelet/CRI-O it will setup Pod's network according to the
configs and Annotations (not a database with "expected states"), therefore updating Multus does not
require migration strategies.

If the schema of NetworkAttachmentDefinitions CRD changes, instead of deploying a mutating webhook
(which would use resources idling but actually perform actions on first start), we can just suggest
users to update their CRs.

## Version Skew Strategy

Building Multus and MicroShift RPMs from the same spec file means Multus should be updated together
with MicroShift which means there should not be any version skew between MicroShift and Multus.
This might change with introduction of multi-node deployments of MicroShift.

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

> If Multus (or any delegate CNIs it executes) fails, a new Pod will be stuck in "ContainerCreating" status

Reviewer 5: Perhaps a good troubleshooting step?

Author: Well, that's just it: Pod doesn't start because of the error, user runs `oc describe $POD` and in the events there's a message from multus.
